---
layout: post
title: "[WIP] What I use to make music"
categories: music
date: 2022-04-10
---

## Hardware

#### MacBook Pro M1 14"

I have jumped between many computers for music production and recently came crawling
back to a Mac. The chain of events:

1. 2015 MacBook Pro 13"
2. Thinkpad X270
3. Thinkpad W540
4. Thinkpad X270
5. Ryzen 2700x PC
6. 2021 MacBook Pro M1 14"

Ever since I sold the first MacBook, it felt like I was fighting Windows audio drivers
constantly. Between latency issues, BSODs due to Focusrite's unstable audio interface
drivers, more BSODs trying to get around [multiple audio interface setups in software](
https://help.ableton.com/hc/en-us/articles/209071609-Using-Aggregate-Devices-and-multiple-audio-interfaces),
I started steering away from in-the-box production and started looking into hardware.

#### The obligatory Teenage Engineering products

Nobody is safe.

###### PO-32 Rhythm

This was the first piece of "gear" I ever bought. I bought this before I had really even
gotten into music production; I saw it as a fun way to make beats here and there.
Considering its form factor and price, I've gotten some really impressive sounds out of
this thing.

###### OP-Z

TLDR: An extremely capable synth/sequencer/sampler in an unreliable chassis.

Slightly longer: I've made entire tracks with _just_ this instrument, but I am sometimes
scared it is going to snap in half while using it. The rigid plastic that the body is
made out of is, unfortunely, not that rigid; mine is starting to slowly warp. This
subtle warping causes the occasional button press to register multiple times and the
battery cover to not fit completely flush. A real shame since it's an incredible
machine.

#### Korg Minilogue XD

Classic intro-level hardware synth. Thousands of videos on YouTube of this one.

#### Waldorf Blofeld (Desktop)

These can be picked up on major discount off eBay/Reverb with a little bit of patience.
While it is a digital synth, the range of sounds this thing can make is truly
impressive. Wavetables, FM synthesis, almost too many modulation options, it's easy to
spend hours just going through and tinkering with the _presets_ on this thing, let alone
creating your own patches. The comb filter in particular has lead to some amazing
patches. On-board effects are passable. The tape delay isn't all that bad.

#### 1970 Wurlitzer Organ

...it was $26 at Salvation Army, I couldn't say no!

#### Focusrite 2i2 audio interface

Simple audio interface. Nothing much to say other than the Windows drivers caused me a
lot of grief. Just works(tm) on Mac.

#### MAudio MIDISport 4x4 Anniversary MIDI interface

This has become an indispensable piece of equipment as I've spent more time using
hardware synths. Using Ableton's `External Instrument` instrument, I can route MIDI from
my MIDI controller to any of the MIDISport's inputs, which then output to my synths.
Audio from the synths is tracked through the Focusrite. This way, I am able to save MIDI
and hear the audio at record-time. I then have the freedom to move the MIDI to another
synth without having to redo the record take, and can record the audio once I've dialed
in the MIDI and/or patch.

#### Shure SM57

I bought the wrong mic before I knew much about microphones. I should've gotten an SM58
or something else non-dynamic. I use this to record a snare occasionally, but I mainly
use it for acoustic guitar, ambience, occasional singing, and percussion. The gain on
the Focusrite is so underpowered that I have to use a Cloudlifter to get any meaningful
audio out of this thing most of the time.

#### Arturia Keystep 37 Pro

Great MIDI keyboard with sequencing, arp, chords, scales, MIDI and CV I/O, mod wheel,
and aftertouch. I don't think I'll be looking for a replacement any time soon, it really
has it all. The keys sometimes feel a bit small, but that works to my advantage since it
uses less desk space.

#### Sony MDR-V6

I'm too scared to move to a different pair of headphones now. They're great.

#### LaunchKey Mini

First MIDI controller I bought. I had it replaced through warranty since it had a bunch
of problems. Only 75% of the pads on the replacement board work. I keep it around if I
ever want to travel with a MIDI keyboard (rare).

#### Yamaha HS5 Studio Monitors

Great speakers, nothing more to say. Tried and true.

## Software

#### Ableton Live 10

I started off using FL Studio, but quickly got annoyed with the window management and
lack of keyboard shortcuts. Ableton has great shortcuts and fast context switching. The
instruments that come with Suite are very impressive in their own right, and the factory
sound packs are incredible as well.

#### Arturia V Collection 8

A great way to substitute the real (and very out of budget) legendary synths for
close-to-authentic sound.

#### Valhalla DSP Reverbs

VintageVerb and SuperMassive are like crutches to me at this point. They always sound
good.
